Enron Submission Free-Response Questions

A critical part of machine learning is making sense of your analysis process and communicating it to others. The questions below will help us understand your decision-making process and allow us to give feedback on your project. Please answer each question; your answers should be about 1-2 paragraphs per question. If you find yourself writing much more than that, take a step back and see if you can simplify your response!

When your evaluator looks at your responses, he or she will use a specific list of rubric items to assess your answers. Here is the link to that rubric: [Link] Each question has one or more specific rubric items associated with it, so before you submit an answer, take a look at that part of the rubric. If your response does not meet expectations for all rubric points, you will be asked to revise and resubmit your project. Make sure that your responses are detailed enough that the evaluator will be able to understand the steps you took and your thought processes as you went through the data analysis.

Once you’ve submitted your responses, your coach will take a look and may ask a few more focused follow-up questions on one or more of your answers.  

We can’t wait to see what you’ve put together for this project!

Summarize for us the goal of this project and how machine learning is useful in trying to accomplish it. As part of your answer, give some background on the dataset and how it can be used to answer the project question. Were there any outliers in the data when you got it, and how did you handle those?  [relevant rubric items: “data exploration”, “outlier investigation”]

    The end-goal of this project is to try understand all ways in which a set of data pertaining in a certain context, can be manipulated and used to better understand this context. Machine learning becomes useful when trying to understand the many variables of a set of data faster than any person can, in order to foresee a future event in a more efficient manner. The dataset describes the best part of almost 150 employees' financial information catalogued by the Enron company before it's plunge. More specifically the dataset contains markers which indicate which employees were previously designated as persons of interest by previous investigations. This is useful since we can analyse the behavior of persons of interest according to the category designated in the data.

    To find those outliers in every column I decided to use a statistical system to look for those data points sitting 1.8 standard deviations away from the mean (about the top 10%). Once found in the data they were removed, with the exception of those who were marked as poi's; this is due to the relative small amount of poi's in the original dataset.

    Outliers removed:

    ['ALLEN PHILLIP K', 'BAXTER JOHN C', 'BAY FRANKLIN R', 'BECK SALLY W', 'WHALLEY LAWRENCE G', 'BHATNAGAR SANJAY', 'WINOKUR JR. HERBERT S', 'BLAKE JR. NORMAN P', 'URQUHART JOHN A', 'CHAN RONNIE', 'WAKEHAM JOHN', 'DERRICK JR. JAMES V', 'DIETRICH JANET R', 'DONAHUE JR JEFFREY M', 'DUNCAN JOHN H', 'ECHOLS JOHN B', 'FREVERT MARK A', 'GRAMM WENDY L', 'HAEDICKE MARK E', 'HORTON STANLEY C', 'WHITE JR THOMAS E', 'HUMPHREY GENE E', 'JAEDICKE ROBERT', 'KAMINSKI WINCENTY J', 'KEAN STEVEN J', 'KITCHEN LOUISE', 'LAVORATO JOHN J', 'LEFF DANIEL P', 'LEMAISTRE CHARLES', 'MARTIN AMANDA K', 'MCCLELLAN GEORGE', 'MCCONNELL MICHAEL S', 'MCMAHON JEFFREY', 'MENDELSOHN JOHN', 'MEYER ROCKFORD G', 'MULLER MARK S', 'PAI LOU L', 'PEREIRA PAULO V. FERRAZ', 'PICKERING MARK R', 'REDMOND BRIAN L', 'SAVAGE FRANK', 'SHANKMAN JEFFREY A', 'SHAPIRO RICHARD S']


What features did you end up using in your POI identifier, and what selection process did you use to pick them? Did you have to do any scaling? Why or why not? As part of the assignment, you should attempt to engineer your own feature that does not come ready-made in the dataset -- explain what feature you tried to make, and the rationale behind it. (You do not necessarily have to use it in the final analysis, only engineer and test it.) In your feature selection step, if you used an algorithm like a decision tree, please also give the feature importances of the features that you use, and if you used an automated feature selection function like SelectKBest, please report the feature scores and reasons for your choice of parameter values.  [relevant rubric items: “create new features”, “intelligently select features”, “properly scale features”]

    The features selected vary depending on what sklearn.feature_selection's SelectPercentile outputs every time poi.py runs; I decided to use this method since it is a more efficient way to pick the best features to use. I did use data scaling in order to achieve better accuracy.  

    I decided to use the email data in the maildir in order to make new features. I used the parseOut function provided in the text learning section in order to parse the text of every email in each employee's sent-email folder. Not all employee's had a maildir folder so I used all of those who were present. The new features are the rooted words present in each employees' emails. their respective values are the results of TfIdf vectorization performed on each employee's groups of emails, which are run down through the SelectPercentile function to find those most important words to identify poi's. Then all features were scaled.  

    The only specified parameter of the Select Percentile function was the percentile size (0.01 percentile) which was so small in order to later use the classifiers as efficiently as possible. The same procedure was performed on the financial features of the orginal dataset (20th percentile). the feature scores are displayed in the consoled after poi.py runs.

    Finally these features used are:

        Financial features:

            bonus: 39.14002444387524,
            from_poi_to_this_person: 30.56983223116838,
            long_term_incentive: 27.789725556121923,
            salary: 28.264638924119147
        Vocabulary features:
    
            alcatel: 1321969.3141762861,
            channels: 1321969.3141762861,
            commitment: 1321969.3141762861,
            creative: 1321969.3141762861,
            dropout: 1321969.3141762861,
            fiesta: 1321969.3141762861,
            fink: 1321969.3141762861,
            frevertenronenronxg: 1321969.3141762861,
            fullservic: 1321969.3141762861,
            johnsonenronenronxg: 1321969.3141762861


            These vocabulary features are the highest scoring instances of text present in the emails from maildir after all emails used were parsed and vectorized.

        Total number of data points: 102
        Total number of POIs in data used: 18
        Total number of non-POIs in data used: 84
        Total number of features in data used: 16

    There are no empty features in the final dataset.

    When different percentile values of features present in the final training dataset were selected, worst results were obtained:

        selecting 30th percentile of financial features and 0.005th percentile of email vocabulary features:

        Accuracy: 0.82500   Precision: 0.54199  Recall: 0.24200

        selecting 10th percentile of financial features and 0.005th percentile of email vocabulary features:

        Accuracy: 0.75057   Precision: 0.89198  Recall: 0.14450

        selecting 10th percentile of financial features and 0.001st percentile of email vocabulary features threw an error in which not one vocabulary feature was selected and could not be tested

        Ultimately, selecting 20th percentile of financial features and 0.01st percentile of email vocabulary features resulted in the best scores:

        Accuracy: 0.82300   Precision: 0.77547  Recall: 0.41100

    "Why did the other Percentiles not provide the best features?"

    This might have to do with either a significant lack of information in the features when the percentiles were cut too short.

    "How did the optimal percentile differ from the other percentiles via Precision and Recall scores?"

    The optimal pecentiles included more vocabulary features than any of the other selections, which seemed to have affected mainly the recall score, with a slight change in precision and accuracy.  


What algorithm did you end up using? What other one(s) did you try? How did model performance differ between algorithms?  [relevant rubric item: “pick an algorithm”]

    I used neighbors' KNeighborsClassifier as my ultimate classifier. I tried using ensemble's RandomForestClassifier and svm's LinearSVC with an rbf kernel. The random forest classifier pnly achieved a precision no higher 0.25 and an equal recall, whereas the support vector classifier could not be used since it would only output negative poi predictions.


What does it mean to tune the parameters of an algorithm, and what can happen if you don’t do this well?  How did you tune the parameters of your particular algorithm? What parameters did you tune? (Some algorithms do not have parameters that you need to tune -- if this is the case for the one you picked, identify and briefly explain how you would have done it for the model that was not your final choice or a different model that does utilize parameter tuning, e.g. a decision tree classifier).  [relevant rubric items: “discuss parameter tuning”, “tune the algorithm”]

    Tuning is to adjust the parameters of an algorithm that can change the variation of accuracy, and efficiency of said algorithm when iteratating through a dataset. When coding my classifier I decided to alter the parameters: n_neighbors, algorithm and leaf_size. To alter the paramaters of my classifier I used sklearn.model_selection's GridSearch.

    It is important to perform parameter tuning because when it's not, calculations may take longer times to compute or may not obtain the maximum accuracy that a different set of parameters may. An example of this was previously shown in the lectures with the SVC an it's selection of kernels.

    {'algorithm': 'ball_tree', 'leaf_size': 10, 'n_neighbors': 5}

What is validation, and what’s a classic mistake you can make if you do it wrong? How did you validate your analysis?  [relevant rubric items: “discuss validation”, “validation strategy”]

    Validation is the testing of any classifier. A classic mistake is interpreting a classifier overall result accuracy as the ultimate testing benchmark, when in reality, other measurements such as recall may have a greater importances when building such a classifier.The code uses train_test_split in order to train and validate our algorithm's performance. 

    Validation is important in order to address the performance of any classifier and review whether such performance satisfies standards set forth by the analysts.

Give at least 2 evaluation metrics and your average performance for each of them.  Explain an interpretation of your metrics that says something human-understandable about your algorithm’s performance. [relevant rubric item: “usage of evaluation metrics”]

    Accuracy: 0.82300   Precision: 0.77547  Recall: 0.41100

    Accuracy is the percentage of predictions that the classifier got correctly, regardless of what the prediction was (how many poi and non-poi it predicted correctly). Precision is the percentage of True positive poi's flagged out of all positive poi's flagged (# of true positives divided by # of true and false positives) predicted by the classifier. Recall on the other hand is the percentage of true positive poi's flagged out of all true poi's that exist in the set.

List of websites used for references:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jeffrey_Skilling
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enron_scandal
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Precision_and_recall
https://github.com/udacity/ud120-projects/tree/master/final_project
http://scikit-learn.org
